How the Economic Machine Works
A Template for Understanding What is Happening Now
Ray Dalio
Created October 31, 2008 | Updated March, 2012
The economy is like a machine. At the most fundamental level it is a relatively simple machine, yet it is not well
understood. I wrote this paper to describe how I believe it works. My description is not the same as
conventional economists’ descriptions so you should decide for yourself whether or not what I’m saying makes
sense. I will start with the simple things and build up, so please bear with me. You will be able to understand and
assess my description if we patiently go through it.

How the Economic Machine Works: “A Transactions-Based Approach”
An economy is simply the sum of the transactions that make it up. A transaction is a simple thing. Because
there are a lot of them, the economy looks more complex than it really is. If instead of looking at it from the top
down, we look at it from the transaction up, it is much easier to understand.
A transaction consists of the buyer giving money (or credit) to a seller and the seller giving a good, a service or a
financial asset to the buyer in exchange. A market consists of all the buyers and sellers making exchanges for
the same things – e.g., the wheat market consists of different people making different transactions for different
reasons over time. An economy consists of all of the transactions in all of its markets. So, while seemingly
complex, an economy is really just a zillion simple things working together, which makes it look more complex
than it really is.
For any market, or for any economy, if you know the total amount of money (or credit) spent and the total
quantity sold, you know everything you need to know to understand it. For example, since the price of any good,
service or financial asset equals the total amount spent by buyers (total $) divided by the total quantity sold by
sellers (total Q), in order to understand or forecast the price of anything you just need to forecast total $ and
total Q. While in any market there are lots of buyers and sellers, and these buyers and sellers have different
motivations, the motivations of the most important buyers are usually pretty understandable and adding them up
to understand the economy isn’t all that tough if one builds from the transactions up. What I am saying is
conveyed in the simple diagram below. This perspective of supply and demand is different from the traditional
perspective in which both supply and demand are measured in quantity and the price relationship between them
is described in terms of elasticity. This difference has important implications for understanding markets.

Price = Total $ / Total Q

Reason A
Reason B

Buyer 1

Reason A
Money
Reason B

Buyer 2

Credit

Reason C

Total
$

Total
Q

Reason A

Seller 2

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

Reason B
Reason C

Reason A

etc…

Reason C

Reason B
Reason C

y
ne
Mo dit
e
r
C

Reason A
Reason B

Seller 1

Mo
Cre ney
dit

Reason C

Reason A

etc…

Total $ = Money + Credit

1

Reason B
Reason C

The only other important thing to know about this part of the Template is that spending ($) can come in either of
two forms – money and credit. For example, when you go to a store to buy something you can pay with either a
credit card or cash. If you pay with a credit card you have created credit, which is a promise to deliver money at a
later date,1 whereas, if you pay with money, you have no such liability.
In brief, there are different types of markets, different types of buyers and sellers and different ways of paying
that make up the economy. For simplicity, we will put them in groups and summarize how the machine works.
Most basically:


All changes in economic activity and all changes in financial markets’ prices are due to changes in the
amounts of 1) money or 2) credit that are spent on them (total $), and the amounts of these items sold
(total Q). Changes in the amount of buying (total $) typically have a much bigger impact on changes in
economic activity and prices than do changes in the total amount of selling (total Q). That is because
there is nothing that’s easier to change than the supply of money and credit (total $).



For simplicity, let’s cluster the buyers in a few big categories. Buying can come from either 1) the private
sector or 2) the government sector. The private sector consists of “households” and businesses that
can be either domestic or foreign. The government sector most importantly consists of a) the Federal
Government2 which spends its money on goods and services and b) the central bank, which is the only
entity that can create money and, by and large, mostly spends its money on financial assets.

Because money and credit, and through them demand, are easier to create (or stop creating) than the production
of goods and services and investment assets, we have economic and price cycles.

The Capitalist System
As mentioned, the previously outlined economic players buy and sell both 1) goods and services and 2) financial
assets, and they can pay for them with either 1) money or 2) credit. In a capitalist system, this exchange takes
place through free choice – i.e., there are “free markets” in which buyers and sellers of goods, services and
financial assets make their transactions in pursuit of their own interests. The production and purchases of
financial assets (i.e., lending and investing) is called “capital formation”. It occurs because both the buyer and
seller of these financial assets believe that the transaction is good for them. Those with money and credit
provide it to recipients in exchange for the recipients’ “promises” to pay them more. So, for this process to work
well, there must be large numbers of capable providers of capital (i.e., investors/lenders) who choose to give
money and credit to large numbers of capable recipients of capital (borrowers and sellers of equity) in exchange
for the recipients’ believable claims that they will return amounts of money and credit that are worth more than
they were given. While the amount of money in existence is controlled by central banks, the amount of credit in
existence can be created out of thin air – i.e. any two willing parties can agree to do a transaction on credit –
though this is influenced by central bank policies. In bubbles more credit is created than can be later paid back,
which creates busts.
When capital contractions occur, economic contractions also occur, i.e. there is not enough money and/or credit
spent on goods, services and financial assets. These contractions typically occur for two reasons, which are
most commonly known as recessions (which are contractions within a short-term debt cycle) and depressions
(which are contractions within deleveragings). Recessions are typically well understood because they happen
often and most of us have experienced them, whereas depressions and deleveragings are typically poorly
understood because they happen infrequently and are not widely experienced.

1

Credit can be created on the spot between consenting parties. The idea of money going around via "velocity" and adding up to nominal GDP
is a misleading description of what happens.
2
State and local governments are of course still significant.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

2

A short-term cycle, (which is commonly called the business cycle), arises from a) the rate of growth in
spending (i.e. total $ funded by the rates of growth in money and credit) being faster than the rate of growth in
the capacity to produce (i.e. total Q) leading to price (P) increases until b) the rate of growth in spending is
curtailed by tight money and credit, at which time a recession occurs. In other words, a recession is an
economic contraction that is due to a contraction in private sector debt growth arising from tight central bank
policy (usually to fight inflation), which ends when the central bank eases. Recessions end when central banks
lower interest rates to stimulate demand for goods and services and the credit growth that finances these
purchases, because lower interest rates 1) reduce debt service costs; 2) lower monthly payments (de-facto, the
costs) of items bought on credit, which stimulates the demand for them; and 3) raise the prices of incomeproducing assets like stocks, bonds and real estate through the present value effect of discounting their expected
cash flows at the lower interest rates, producing a “wealth effect” on spending.
In contrast:
A long-term debt cycle, arises from debts rising faster than both incomes and money until this can’t continue
because debt service costs become excessive, typically because interest rates can’t be reduced any more. A
deleveraging is the process of reducing debt burdens (i.e. debt and debt service relative to incomes).
Deleveragings typically end via a mix of 1) debt reduction,3 2) austerity, 3) redistributions of wealth, and 4) debt
monetization. A depression is the economic contraction phase of a deleveraging. It occurs because the
contraction in private sector debt cannot be rectified by the central bank lowering the cost of money. In
depressions, a) a large number of debtors have obligations to deliver more money than they have to meet their
obligations, and b) monetary policy is ineffective in reducing debt service costs and stimulating credit growth.
Typically, monetary policy is ineffective in stimulating credit growth either because interest rates can’t be
lowered (because interest rates are near 0%) to the point of favorably influencing the economics of spending
and capital formation (this produces deflationary deleveragings), or because money growth goes into the
purchase of inflation hedge assets rather than into credit growth, which produces inflationary deleveragings.
Depressions are typically ended by central banks printing money to monetize debt in amounts that offset the
deflationary depression effects of debt reductions and austerity.
To be clear, while depressions are the contraction phase of a deleveraging, deleveragings (e.g. reducing debt
burdens) can occur without depressions if they are well managed. (See our “An In-Depth Look at
Deleveragings.”)
Differences in how governments behave in recessions and deleveragings are good clues that signal which is
happening. For example, in deleveragings, central banks typically “print” money that they use to buy large
quantities of financial assets in order to compensate for the decline in private sector credit, while these actions
4
are unheard of in recessions. Also, in deleveragings, central governments typically spend much, much more to
make up for the fall in private sector spending.
But let’s not get ahead of ourselves. Since these two types of contractions are just parts of two different types of
cycles that are explained more completely in this template, let’s look at the template.

3

Debt reductions take the form of some mix of debt writedowns (so the amount of debt to be repaid is reduced), the timing of debt
payments being extended and interest rates being reduced.
4
These show up in changes in their balance sheets that don’t occur in recessions.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

3

The Template: The Three Big Forces
I believe that three main forces drive most economic activity: 1) trend line productivity growth, 2) the long-term
debt cycle and 3) the short-term debt cycle. Figuratively speaking, they look as shown below:

1.

2.

3.

What follows is an explanation of all three of these forces and how, by overlaying the archetypical “business”
cycle on top of the archetypical long-term debt cycle and overlaying them both on top of the productivity trend
line, one can derive a good template for tracking most economic/market movements. While these three forces
apply to all countries’ economies, in this study we will look at the U.S. economy over the last hundred years or so
as an example to convey the template. In “An In-Depth Look at Deleveragings” and “Why Countries Succeed
and Fail Economically” we will look at these cycles across countries.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

4

1) Productivity Growth
As shown below in chart 1, real per capita GDP has increased at an average rate of a shade less than 2% over the
last 100 years and didn’t vary a lot from that. (For an explanation for how and why this varies by country and
over time, see the accompanying study “Why Countries Succeed and Fail Economically.”) This is because, over
time, knowledge increases, which in turn raises productivity and living standards. As shown in this chart, over
the very long run, there is relatively little variation from the trend line. Even the Great Depression in the 1930s
looks rather small. As a result, we can be relatively confident that, with time, the economy will get back on track.
However, up close, these variations from trend can be enormous. For example, typically in depressions the peakto-trough declines in real economic activity are around 20%, the destruction of financial wealth is typically more
than 50% and equity prices typically decline by around 80%. The losses in financial wealth for those who have it
at the beginning of depressions are typically greater than these numbers suggest because there is also a
tremendous shifting of who has wealth.
Chart 1
Real GDP Per Capita (2008 Dollars, ln)
4.0
2.1%

3.5

2.0%
2.3%

3.0

1.1%
so far

3.0%
2.1%

4.1%
0.2%

2.5
1.8%
2.0

0.8%

2.8%

1.5
1.0
00

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

00

Sources: Global Financial Data & BW Estimates

Swings around this trend are not primarily due to expansions and contractions in knowledge. For example, the
Great Depression didn't occur because people forgot how to efficiently produce, and it wasn't set off by war or
drought. All the elements that make the economy buzz were there, yet it stagnated. So why didn't the idle
factories simply hire the unemployed to utilize the abundant resources in order to produce prosperity? These
cycles are not due to events beyond our control, e.g., natural disasters. They are due to human nature and the
way the credit system works.
Most importantly, major swings around the trend are due to expansions and contractions in credit – i.e., credit
cycles, most importantly 1) a long-term (typically 50 to 75 years) debt cycle (i.e., the “long wave cycle”) and 2) a
shorter-term (typically 5 to 8 years) debt cycle (i.e., the “business/market cycle”).

About Debt Cycles
We find that whenever we start talking about cycles, particularly the “long-wave” variety, we raise eyebrows and
elicit reactions similar to those we’d expect if we were talking about astrology. For this reason, before we begin
explaining these two debt cycles we'd like to say a few things about cycles in general.
A cycle is nothing more than a logical sequence of events leading to a repetitious pattern. In a capitalist
economy, cycles of expansions in credit and contractions in credit drive economic cycles and they occur for
perfectly logical reasons. Each sequence is not pre-destined to repeat in exactly the same way nor to take

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

5

exactly the same amount of time, though the patterns are similar, for logical reasons. For example, if you
understand the game of Monopoly®, you can pretty well understand credit and economic cycles. Early in the
game of Monopoly®, people have a lot of cash and few hotels, and it pays to convert cash into hotels. Those who
have more hotels make more money. Seeing this, people tend to convert as much cash as possible into property
in order to profit from making other players give them cash. So as the game progresses, more hotels are
acquired, which creates more need for cash (to pay the bills of landing on someone else’s property with lots of
hotels on it) at the same time as many folks have run down their cash to buy hotels. When they are caught
needing cash, they are forced to sell their hotels at discounted prices. So early in the game, “property is king”
and later in the game, “cash is king.” Those who are best at playing the game understand how to hold the right
mix of property and cash, as this right mix changes.
Now, let’s imagine how this Monopoly® game would work if we changed the role of the bank so that it could
make loans and take deposits. Players would then be able to borrow money to buy hotels and, rather than
holding their cash idly, they would deposit it at the bank to earn interest, which would provide the bank with
more money to lend. Let’s also imagine that players in this game could buy and sell properties from each other
giving each other credit (i.e., promises to give money and at a later date). If Monopoly® were played this way, it
would provide an almost perfect model for the way our economy operates. There would be more spending on
hotels (that would be financed with promises to deliver money at a later date). The amount owed would quickly
grow to multiples of the amount of money in existence, hotel prices would be higher, and the cash shortage for
the debtors who hold hotels would become greater down the road. So, the cycles would become more
pronounced. The bank and those who saved by depositing their money in it would also get into trouble when the
inability to come up with needed cash caused withdrawals from the bank at the same time as debtors couldn’t
come up with cash to pay the bank. Basically, economic and credit cycles work this way.
We are now going to look at how credit cycles – both long-term debt cycles and “business cycles” – drive
economic cycles.

How the System Works
Prosperity exists when the economy is operating at a high level of capacity: in other words, when demand is
pressing up against a pre-existing level of capacity. At such times, business profits are good and unemployment
is low. The longer these conditions persist, the more capacity will be increased, typically financed by credit
growth. Declining demand creates a condition of low capacity utilization; as a result, business profits are bad and
unemployment is high. The longer these conditions exist, the more cost-cutting (i.e., restructuring) will occur,
typically including debt and equity write-downs. Therefore, prosperity equals high demand, and in our creditbased economy, strong demand equals strong real credit growth; conversely, deleveraging equals low demand,
and hence lower and falling real credit growth. Contrary to now-popular thinking, recessions and depressions do
not develop because of productivity (i.e., inabilities to produce efficiently); they develop from declines in
demand, typically due to a fall-off in credit creation.
Since changes in demand precede changes in capacity in determining the direction of the economy, one would
think that prosperity would be easy to achieve simply through pursuing policies which would steadily increase
demand. When the economy is plagued by low capacity utilization, depressed business profitability and high
unemployment, why doesn't the government simply give it a good shot of whatever it takes to stimulate demand
in order to produce a far more pleasant environment of high capacity utilization, fat profits and low
unemployment? The answer has to do with what that shot consists of.

Money
Money is what you settle your payments with. Some people mistakenly believe that money is whatever will buy
you goods and services, whether that's dollar bills or simply a promise to pay (e.g., whether it's a credit card or
an account at the local grocery). When a department store gives you merchandise in return for your signature

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

6

on a credit card form, is that signature money? No, because you did not settle the transaction. Rather, you
promised to pay money. So you created credit, which is a promise to pay money.
The Federal Reserve has chosen to define “money” in terms of aggregates (i.e., currency plus various forms of
credit - M1, M2, etc.), but this is misleading. Virtually all of what they call money is credit (i.e., promises to
deliver money) rather than money itself. The total amount of debt in the U.S. is about $50 trillion and the total
amount of money (i.e., currency and reserves) in existence is about $3 trillion. So, if we were to use these
numbers as a guide, the amount of promises to deliver money (i.e., debt) is roughly 15 times the amount of
5
money there is to deliver. The main point is that most people buy things with credit and don’t pay much
attention to what they are promising to deliver and where they are going to get it from, so there is much less
money than obligations to deliver it.

Credit
As mentioned, credit is the promise to deliver money, and credit spends just like money. While credit and money
spend just as easily, when you pay with money the transaction is settled; but if you pay with credit, the payment
has yet to be made.
There are two ways demand can increase: with credit or without it. Of course, it's far easier to stimulate demand
with credit than without it. For example, in an economy in which there is no credit, if I want to buy a good or
service I would have to exchange it for a comparably valued good or service of my own. Therefore, the only way I
can increase what I own and the economy as a whole can grow is through increased production. As a result, in
an economy without credit, the growth in demand is constrained by the growth in production. This tends to
reduce the occurrence of boom-bust cycles, but it also reduces both the efficiency that leads to high prosperity
and severe deleveraging, i.e., it tends to produce lower swings around the productivity growth trend line of about
2%.
By contrast, in an economy in which credit is readily available, I can acquire goods and services without giving up
any of my own. A bank will lend the money on my pledge to repay, secured by my existing assets and future
earnings. For these reasons credit and spending can grow faster than money and income. Since that sounds
counterintuitive, let me give an example of how that can work.
If I ask you to paint my office with an agreement that I will give you the money in a few months, your painting my
office will add to your income (because you were paid with credit), so it will add to GDP, and it will add to your
net worth (because my promise to pay is considered as much of an asset as the cash that I still owe you). Our
transaction will also add an asset (i.e., the capital improvement in my office) and a liability (the debt I still owe
you) to my balance sheet. Now let’s say that buoyed by this increased amount of business that I gave you and
your improved financial condition that you want to expand. So you go to your banker who sees your increased
income and net worth, so he is delighted to lend you some “money” (increasing his sales and his balance sheet)
that you decide to buy a financial asset with (let’s say stocks) until you want to spend it. As you can see, debt,
spending and investment would have increased relative to money and income.
This process can be, and generally is, self-reinforcing because rising spending generates rising incomes and rising
net worths, which raise borrowers’ capacity to borrow, which allows more buying and spending, etc. Typically,
monetary expansions are used to support credit expansions because more money in the system makes it easier
for debtors to pay off their loans (with money of less value), and it makes the assets I acquired worth more
because there is more money around to bid them. As a result, monetary expansions improve credit ratings and
increase collateral values, making it that much easier to borrow and buy more.
In such an economy, demand is constrained only by the willingness of creditors and debtors to extend and
receive credit. When credit is easy and cheap, borrowing and spending will occur; and when it is scarce and
5

As a substantial amount of dollar-denominated debt exists outside the U.S., the total amount of claims on dollars is greater than this
characterization indicates, so it is provided solely for illustrative purposes.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

7

expensive, borrowing and spending will be less. In the “business cycle,” the central bank will control the supply
of money and influence the amount of credit that the private sector creates by influencing the cost of credit (i.e.,
interest rates). Changes in private sector credit drive the cycle. Over the long term, typically decades, debt
burdens rise. This obviously cannot continue forever. When it can’t continue a deleveraging occurs.
As previously mentioned, the most fundamental requirement for private sector credit creation to occur in a
capitalist system is that both borrowers and lenders believe that the deal is good for them. Since one man’s debts
are another man’s assets, lenders have to believe that they will get paid back an amount of money that is greater
than inflation (i.e., more than they could get by storing their wealth in inflation hedge assets), net of taxes. And,
because debtors have to pledge their assets (i.e., equity) as collateral in order to motivate the lenders, they have
to be at least as confident in their abilities to pay their debts as they value the assets (i.e., equity) that they
pledged as collateral.
Also, an important consideration of investors is liquidity – i.e., the ability to sell their investments for money and
use that money to buy goods and services. For example, if I own a $100,000 Treasury bond, I probably presume
that I'll be able to exchange it for $100,000 in cash and in turn exchange the cash for $100,000 worth of goods
and services. However, since the ratio of financial assets to money is so high, obviously if a large number of
people tried to convert their financial assets into money and buy goods and services at the same time, the central
bank would have to either produce a lot more money (risking a monetary inflation) and/or allow a lot of defaults
(causing a deflationary deleveraging).

Monetary Systems
One of the greatest powers governments have is the creation of money and credit, which they exert by
determining their countries’ monetary systems and by controlling the levers that increase and decrease the
supply of money and credit. The monetary systems chosen have varied over time and between countries. In the
old days there was barter - i.e., the exchange of items of equal intrinsic value. That was the basis of money.
When you paid with gold coins, the exchange was for items of equal intrinsic value. Then credit developed – i.e.,
promises to deliver “money” of intrinsic value. Then there were promises to deliver money that didn’t have
intrinsic value.
Those who lend expect that they will get back an amount of money that can be converted into goods or services
of a somewhat greater purchasing power than the money they originally lent – i.e., they use credit to exchange
goods and services today for comparably valuable goods and services in the future. Since credit began, creditors
essentially asked those who controlled the monetary systems: “How do we know you won’t just print a lot of
money that won’t buy me much when I go to exchange it for goods and services in the future?” At different
times, this question was answered differently.
Basically, there are two types of monetary systems: 1) commodity-based systems – those systems consisting of
some commodity (usually gold), currency (which can be converted into the commodity at a fixed price) and
credit (a claim on the currency); and 2) fiat systems – those systems consisting of just currency and credit. In
the first system, it's more difficult to create credit expansions. That is because the public will offset the
government's attempts to increase currency and credit by giving both back to the government in return for the
commodity they are exchangeable for. As the supply of money increases, its value falls; or looked at the other
way, the value of the commodity it is convertible into rises. When it rises above the fixed price, it is profitable for
those holding credit (i.e., claims on the currency) to sell their debt for currency in order to buy the tangible asset
from the government at below the market price. The selling of the credit and the taking of currency out of
circulation cause credit to tighten and the value of the money to rise; on the other hand, the general price level of
goods and services will fall. Its effect will be lower inflation and lower economic activity.
Since the value of money has fallen over time relative to the value of just about everything else, we could tie the
currency to just about anything in order to show how this monetary system would have worked. For example,
since a one-pound loaf of white bread in 1946 cost ten cents, let's imagine we tied the dollar to bread. In other

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

8

words, let’s imagine a monetary system in which the government in 1946 committed to buy bread at 10 cents a
pound and stuck to that until now. Today a pound loaf of white bread costs $2.75. Of course, if they had used
this monetary system, the price couldn’t have risen to $2.75 because we all would have bought our bread from
the government at ten cents instead of from the free market until the government ran out of bread. But, for our
example, let’s say that the price of bread is $2.75. I'd certainly be willing to take all of my money, buy bread from
the government at 10 cents and sell it in the market at $2.75, and others would do the same. This process would
reduce the amount of money in circulation, which would then reduce the prices of all goods and services, and it
would increase the amount of bread in circulation (thus lowering its price more rapidly than other prices). In
fact, if the supply and demand for bread were not greatly influenced by its convertibility to currency, this tie
would have dramatically slowed the last 50 years’ rapid growth in currency and credit.
Obviously, what the currency is convertible into has an enormous impact on this process. For example, if instead
of tying the dollar to bread, we chose to tie it to eggs, since the price of a dozen eggs in 1947 was seventy cents
and today it is about $2.00, currency and credit growth would have been less restricted.
Ideally, if one has a commodity-based currency system, one wants to tie the currency to something that is not
subject to great swings in supply or demand. For example, if the currency were tied to bread, bakeries would in
effect have the power to produce money, leading to increased inflation. Gold and, to a much lesser extent, silver
have historically proven more stable than most other currency backings, although they are by no means perfect.
In the second type of monetary system – i.e., in a fiat system in which the amount of money is not constrained by
the ability to exchange it for a commodity – the growth of money and credit is very much subject to the influence
of the central bank and the willingness of borrowers and lenders to create credit.
Governments typically prefer fiat systems because they offer more power to print money, expand credit and
redistribute wealth by changing the value of money. Human nature being what it is, those in government (and
those not) tend to value immediate gratification over longer-term benefits, so government policies tend to
increase demand by allowing liberal credit creation, which leads to debt crises. Governments typically choose
commodity-based systems only when they are forced to in reaction to the value of money having been severely
depreciated due to the government’s “printing” of a lot of it to relieve the excessive debt burdens that their
unconstrained monetary systems allowed. They abandon commodity-based monetary systems when the
constraints to money creation become too onerous in debt crises. So throughout history, governments have
gone back and forth between commodity-based and fiat monetary systems in reaction to the painful
consequences of each. However, they don’t make these changes often, as monetary systems typically work well
for many years, often decades, with central banks varying interest rates and money supplies to control credit
growth
well
enough
so
that
these
inflection
points
are
infrequently
reached.
In the next two sections we first describe the long-term debt cycle and then the business/market cycle.

2) The Long-Term (i.e., Long Wave) Cycle
As previously mentioned, when debts and spending rise faster than money and income, the process is selfreinforcing on the upside because rising spending generates rising incomes and rising net worths, which raise
borrowers’ capacity to borrow which allows more buying and spending, etc. However, since debts can’t rise
faster than money and income forever there are limits to debt growth. Think of debt growth that is faster than
income growth as being like air in a scuba bottle – there is a limited amount of it that you can use to get an extra
boost, but you can’t live on it forever. In the case of debt, you can take it out before you put it in (i.e., if you don’t
have any debt, you can take it out), but you are expected to return what you took out. When you are taking it
out, you can spend more than is sustainable, which will give you the appearance of being prosperous. At such
times, you and those who are lending to you might mistake you as being creditworthy and not pay enough
attention to what paying back will look like. When debts can no longer be raised relative to incomes and the time
of paying back comes, the process works in reverse. It is that dynamic that creates long-term debt cycles. These

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

9

long-term debt cycles have existed for as long as there has been credit. Even the Old Testament described the
need to wipe out debt once every 50 years, which was called the year of Jubilee.
The next chart shows U.S. debt/GDP going back to 1916 and conveys the long-term debt cycle.
Chart 2
US Total Debt as a % of GDP
400%
350%
300%
250%
200%
150%
100%
16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56
Sources: Global Financial Data & BW Estimates

61

66

71

76

81

86

91

96

01

06

11

Upswings in the cycle occur, and are self-reinforcing, in a process by which money growth creates greater debt
growth, which finances spending growth and asset purchases. Spending growth and higher asset prices allow
even more debt growth. This is because lenders determine how much they can lend on the basis of the
borrowers’ 1) income/cash flows to service the debt and 2) net worth/collateral, as well as their own capacities
to lend, and these rise in a self-reinforcing manner.
Suppose you earn $100,000, have a net worth of $100,000 and have no debt. You have the capacity to borrow
$10,000/year, so you could spend $110,000 per year for a number of years, even though you only earn
$100,000. For an economy as a whole, this increased spending leads to higher earnings, that supports stock
valuations and other asset values, giving people higher incomes and more collateral to borrow more against, and
so on. In the up-wave part of the cycle, promises to deliver money (i.e., debt burdens) rise relative to both a) the
supply of money and b) the amount of money and credit debtors have coming in (via incomes, borrowings and
sales of assets). This up-wave in the cycle typically goes on for decades, with variations in it primarily due to
central banks tightening and easing credit (which makes business cycles). But it can’t go on forever. Eventually
the debt service payments become equal to or larger than the amount we can borrow and the spending must
decline. When promises to deliver money (debt) can’t rise any more relative to the money and credit coming in,
the process works in reverse and we have deleveragings. Since borrowing is simply a way of pulling spending
forward, the person spending $110,000 per year and earning $100,000 per year has to cut his spending to
$90,000 for as many years as he spent $110,000, all else being equal.
While the last chart showed the amount of debt relative to GDP, the debt ratio, it is more precise to say that high
debt service payments (i.e., principal and interest combined), rather than high debt levels, cause debt squeezes
because cash flows rather than levels of debt create the squeezes that slow the economy. For example, if
interest rates fall enough, debts can increase without debt service payments rising enough to cause a squeeze.
This dynamic is best conveyed in the chart below. It shows interest payments, principal payments and total debt
service payments of American households as a percentage of their disposable incomes going back to 1920. We
are showing this debt service burden for the household sector because the household sector is the most
important part of the economy; however, the concept applies equally well to all sectors and all individuals. As
shown, the debt service burden of households has increased to the highest level since the Great Depression.
What triggers reversals?

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

10

Chart 3
Household Debt Service (as % of Disposable Income)
Total Debt Service

Interest Burden

Amortization

16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
19

24

29

34

39

44

49

54

59

64

69

74

79

84

89

94

99

04

09

Sources: Global Financial Data & BW Estimates

The long-term debt cycle top occurs when 1) debt burdens are high and/or 2) monetary policy doesn’t
produce credit growth. From that point on, debt can’t rise relative to incomes, net worth and money supply.
That is when deleveraging – i.e. bringing down these debt ratios – begins. All deleveragings start because there is
a shortage of money relative to debtors’ needs for it. This leads to large numbers of businesses, households and
financial institutions defaulting on their debts and cutting costs, which leads to higher unemployment and other
problems. While these debt problems can occur for many reasons, most classically they occur because
investment assets are bought at high prices and with leverage6 – i.e., because debt levels are set on the basis of
overly optimistic assumptions about future cash flows. As a result of this, actual cash flows fall short of what’s
required for debtors to service their debts. Ironically, quite often in the early stages the cash flows fall short
because of tight monetary policies that are overdue attempts to curtail these bubble activities (buying overpriced
assets with excessive leverage), so that the tight money triggers them (e.g., in 1928/29 in much of the world, in
1989/91 in Japan and in 2006/07 in much of the world). Also ironically, inflation in financial assets is more
dangerous than inflation in goods and services because this financial asset inflation appears like a good thing and
isn’t prevented even though it is as dangerous as any other form of over-indebtedness. In fact, while debt
financed financial booms that are accompanied by low inflation are typically precursors of busts, at the time they
typically appear to be investment generated productivity booms (e.g. much of the world in the late 1920s, Japan
in the late 1980s and much of the world in the mid 2000s).
Typically, though not always, interest rates decline in reaction to the economic and market declines and central
banks easing, but they can’t decline enough because they hit 0%. As a result, the abilities of central banks to
alleviate these debt burdens, to stimulate private credit growth and to cause asset prices to rise via lower interest
rates are lost. These conditions cause buyers of financial assets to doubt that the value of the money they will
get from owning this asset will be more than the value of the money they pay for it. Then monetary policy is
ineffective in rectifying the imbalance.
In deleveragings, rather than indebtedness increasing (i.e. debt and debt service rising relative to income and
money), it decreases. This can happen in one of four ways: 1) debt reduction, 2) austerity, 3) transferring wealth
from the haves to the have-nots and 4) debt monetization. Each one of these four paths reduces debt/income
ratios, but they have different effects on inflation and growth. Debt reduction (i.e., defaults and restructurings)
and austerity are both deflationary and depressing while debt monetization is inflationary and stimulative.

6

This time around, residential and commercial real estate, private equity, lower grade credits and, to a lesser extent, listed equities were the
assets that were bought at high prices and on lots of leverage. In both the U.S. Great Depression and in the Japanese deleveraging, stocks
and real estate were also the assets of choice that were bought at high prices and on leverage.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

11

Transfers of wealth typically occur in many forms, but rarely in amounts that contribute meaningfully to the
deleveraging. The differences between how deleveragings play out depends on the amounts and paces of these
four measures.
Depressions are the contraction phase of the deleveraging process. Typically the “depression” phase of the
deleveraging process comes at the first part of the deleveraging process, when defaults and austerity (i.e. the
forces of deflation and depression) dominate. Initially, in the depression phase of the deleveraging process, the
money coming in to debtors via incomes and borrowings is not enough to meet debtors’ obligations, assets need
to be sold and spending needs to be cut in order to raise cash. This leads asset values to fall, which reduces the
value of collateral, and in turn reduces incomes. Because of both lower collateral values and lower incomes,
borrowers’ creditworthiness is reduced, so they justifiably get less credit, and so it continues in a self-reinforcing
manner. Since the creditworthiness of borrowers is judged by both a) the values of their assets/collaterals (i.e.,
their net worths) in relation to their debts and b) the sizes of their incomes relative to the size of their debt
service payments, and since both net worths and incomes fall faster than debts, borrowers become less
creditworthy and lenders become more reluctant to lend. In this phase of the cycle the contraction is selfreinforcing at the same time as debt/income and debt/net-worth ratios rise. That occurs for two reasons. First,
when debts cannot be serviced both debtors and creditors are hurt; since one man’s debts are another man’s
assets, debt problems reduce net worths and borrowing abilities, thus causing a self-reinforcing contraction
cycle. Second, when spending is curtailed incomes are also reduced, thus reducing the ability to spend, also
causing a self-reinforcing contraction.
You can see debt burdens rise at the same time as the economy is in a deflationary depression in both chart 2
and chart 3 above. The vertical line on these charts is at 1929. As you can see in chart 2, the debt/GDP ratio shot
up from about 160% to about 250% from 1929 to 1933. The vertical line in chart 3 shows the same picture – i.e.,
debt service levels rose relative to income levels because income levels fell. In the economic and credit
downturn, debt burdens increase at the same time as debts are being written down, so the debt liquidation
process is reinforced. Chart 4 shows the household sector’s debt relative to its net worth. As shown, this
leverage ratio shot up from already high levels, as it did during the Great Depression, due to declines in net
worths arising from falling housing and stock prices.
Chart 4
USA Household Debt as a % of Net Worth

25%
20%
1929

15%
10%
5%
20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

00

10

Sources: Global Financial Data & BW Estimates

As mentioned earlier, in a credit-based economy, the ability to spend is an extension of the ability to borrow. For
lending/borrowing to occur, lenders have to believe that a) they will get paid back an amount of money that is
greater than inflation and b) they will be able to convert their debt into money. In deleveragings, lenders
justifiably worry that these things will not happen.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

12

Unlike in recessions, when cutting interest rates and creating more money can rectify this imbalance, in
deleveragings monetary policy is ineffective in creating credit. In other words, in recessions (when monetary
policy is effective) the imbalance between the amount of money and the need for it to service debt can be
rectified by cutting interest rates enough to 1) ease debt service burdens, 2) stimulate economic activity because
monthly debt service payments are high relative to incomes and 3) produce a positive wealth effect; however, in
deleveragings, this can’t happen. In deflationary depressions/deleveragings, monetary policy is typically
ineffective in creating credit because interest rates hit 0% and can’t be lowered further, so other, less effective
ways of increasing money are followed. Credit growth is difficult to stimulate because borrowers remain overindebted, making sensible lending impossible. In inflationary deleveragings, monetary policy is ineffective in
creating credit because increased money growth goes into other currencies and inflation hedge assets because
investors fear that their lending will be paid back with money of depreciated value.
In order to try to alleviate this fundamental imbalance, governments inevitably a) create initiatives to encourage
credit creation, b) ease the rules that require debtors to come up with money to service their debts (i.e., create
forbearance) and, most importantly, c) print and spend money to buy goods, services and financial assets. The
printing of and buying financial assets by central banks shows up in central banks’ balance sheets expanding and
the increased spending by central governments shows up in budget deficits exploding. This is shown in the
following three charts.
As shown below, in 1930/32 and in 2007/08 short term government interest rates hit 0%...
US Short Term Interest Rate
20%
15%

Hard
landing

10%
5%
0%
Hard landing
-5%
20

30

40

50

60

70

Sources: Global Financial Data & BW Estimates

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

13

80

90

00

10

…the Fed’s production and spending of money grew…
Change in M0 (Y-Y, % of NGDP)
7%
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
-1%
-2%
-3%

Monetization begins

Monetization begins
20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

00

10

90

00

10

…and budget deficits exploded…

US Federal Budget Surplus as % of NGDP
6%
4%
2%
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%
-8%
-10%

w artime deficit goes to -30%

-12%
20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Sources: Global Financial Data & BW Estimates for charts above

You can tell deleveragings from these three things occurring together, which does not happen at other times.
Typically, though not necessarily, these moves come in progressively larger dosages as initial dosages of these
sorts fail to rectify the imbalance and reverse the deleveraging process; however, these dosages do typically
cause temporary periods of relief that are manifest in bear market rallies in financial assets and increased
economic activity. For example in the Great Depression there were six big rallies in the stock market (of between
21% and 48%) in a bear market that totaled 89%, with all of these rallies triggered by these sorts of increasingly
strong dosages of government actions which were intended to reduce the fundamental imbalance. That is
because a return to an environment of normal capital formation and normal economic activity can occur only by
eliminating this fundamental imbalance so that capable providers of capital (i.e., investors/lenders) willingly
choose to give money to capable recipients of capital (borrowers and sellers of equity) in exchange for believable
claims that they will get back an amount of money that is worth more than they gave. Eventually there is enough
“printing of money” or debt monetization to negate the deflationary forces of both debt reduction and austerity.
When a good balance of debt reduction, austerity, and “printing/monetizing” occurs, debt burdens can fall
relative to incomes with positive economic growth. In the U.S. deleveraging of the 1930s, this occurred in 193337.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

14

Some people mistakenly think that the depression problem is just psychological: that scared investors move their
money from riskier investments to safer ones (e.g., from stocks and high yield lending to government cash), and
that problems can be rectified by coaxing them to move their money back into riskier investments. This is wrong
for two reasons. First, contrary to popular thinking, the deleveraging dynamic is not primarily psychologically
driven. It is primarily driven by the supply and demand of and relationships between credit, money and goods
and services. If everyone went to sleep and woke up with no memories of what had happened, we would all soon
find ourselves in the same position. That is, because debtors still couldn’t service their debts, because their
obligations to deliver money would still be too large relative to the money they are taking in, the government
would still be faced with the same choices that would still have the same consequences, etc. Related to this, if
the central bank produces more money to alleviate the shortage, it will cheapen the value of money, thus not
rectifying creditors’ worries about being paid back an amount of money that is worth more than they gave.
Second, it is not correct that the amount of money in existence remains the same and has simply moved from
riskier assets to less risky ones. Most of what people think is money is really credit, and it does disappear. For
example, when you buy something in a store on a credit card, you essentially do so by saying, “I promise to pay.”
Together you created a credit asset and a credit liability. So where did you take the money from? Nowhere. You
created credit. It goes away in the same way. Suppose the store owner justifiably believes that you and others
might not pay the credit card company and that the credit card company might not pay him if that happens. Then
he correctly believes that the “asset” he has isn’t really there. It didn’t go somewhere else.
As implied by this, a big part of the deleveraging process is people discovering that much of what they thought
was their wealth isn’t really there. When investors try to convert their investments into money in order to raise
needed cash, the liquidity of their investments is tested and, in cases in which the investments prove illiquid,
panic-induced “runs” and sell-offs of their securities occur. Naturally those who experience runs, especially
banks (though this is true of most entities that rely on short-term funding), have problems raising money and
credit to meet their needs, so they often fail. At such times, governments are forced to decide which ones to
save by providing them with money and whether to get this money through the central government (i.e., through
the budget process) or through the central bank “printing” more money. Governments inevitably do both,
though in varying degrees. What determines whether deleveragings are deflationary or inflationary is the extent
to which central banks create money to negate the effects of contracting credit.
Governments with commodity-based monetary systems or pegged currencies are more limited in their abilities
to “print” and provide money, while those with independent fiat monetary systems are less constrained.
However, in both cases, the central bank is eager to provide money and credit, so it always lowers the quality of
the collateral it accepts and, in addition to providing money to some essential banks, it also typically provides
money to some non-bank entities it considers essential.
The central bank’s easing of monetary policy and the movement of investor money to safer investments, initially
drives down short-term government interest rates, steepens the yield curve and widens credit and liquidity
premiums. Those who do not receive money and/or credit that is needed to meet their debt service obligations
and maintain their operations, which is typically a large segment of debtors, default and fail.
In depressions, as credit collapses, workers lose jobs and many of them, having inadequate savings, need
financial support. So in addition to needing money to provide financial support to the system, governments need
money to help those in greatest financial need. Additionally, to the extent that they want to increase spending to
make up for decreased private sector spending, they need more money. At the same time, their tax revenue falls
because incomes fall. For these reasons, governments’ budget deficits increase. Inevitably, the amount of money
lent to governments at these times increases less than their needs (i.e., they have problems funding their
deficits), despite the increased desire of lenders to buy government securities to seek safety at these times. As a
result, central banks are again forced to choose between “printing” more money to buy their governments’ debts
or allowing their governments and their private sector to compete for the limited supply of money, thus allowing
extremely tight money conditions.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

15

Governments with commodity-based money systems are forced to have smaller budget deficits and tighter
monetary policies than governments with fiat monetary systems, though they all eventually relent and print more
money (i.e., those on commodity-based monetary systems either abandon these systems or change the
amount/pricing of the commodity that they will exchange for a unit of money so that they print more, and those
on fiat systems will just print more). This “printing” of money takes the form of central bank purchases of
government securities and non-government assets such as corporate securities, equities and other assets. In
other words, the government “prints” money and uses it to negate some of the effects of contracting credit. This
is reflected in money growing at an extremely fast rate at the same time as credit and real economic activity
contract, so the money multiplier and the velocity of money typically initially contract. If the money creation is
large enough, it devalues the currency, lowers real interest rates and drives investors from financial assets to
inflation hedge assets. This typically happens when investors want to move money outside the currency, and
short-term government debt is no longer considered a safe investment.
Because governments need more money, and since wealth and incomes are typically heavily concentrated in the
hands of a small percentage of the population, governments raise taxes on the wealthy. Also, in deleveragings,
those who earned their money in the booms, especially the capitalists who made a lot of money working in the
financial sector helping to create the debt (and especially the short sellers who some believe profited at others’
expense), are resented. Tensions between the “haves” and the “have-nots” typically increase and, quite often,
there is a move from the right to the left. In fact, there is a saying that essentially says “in booms everyone is a
capitalist and in busts everyone is a socialist.” For these various reasons, taxes on the wealthy are typically
significantly raised. These increased taxes typically take the form of greater income and consumption taxes
because these forms of taxation are the most effective in raising revenues. While sometimes wealth and
7
inheritance taxes are also increased, these typically raise very little money because much wealth is illiquid and,
even for liquid assets, forcing the taxpayer to sell financial assets to make their tax payments undermines capital
formation. Despite these greater taxes on the wealthy, increases in tax revenue are inadequate because incomes
– both earned incomes and incomes from capital – are so depressed, and expenditures on consumption are
reduced.
The wealthy experience a tremendous loss of “real” wealth in all forms – i.e., from their portfolios declining in
value, from their earned incomes declining and from higher rates of taxation, in inflation- adjusted terms. As a
result, they become extremely defensive. Quite often, they are motivated to move their money out of the
country (which contributes to currency weakness), illegally dodge taxes and seek safety in liquid, non-creditdependent investments.
Workers losing jobs and governments wanting to protect them become more protectionist and favor weaker
currency policies. Protectionism slows economic activity, and currency weakness fosters capital flight. Debtor
countries typically suffer most from capital flight.
When money leaves the country, central banks are once again put in the position of having to choose between
“printing” more money, which lessens its value, and not printing money in order to maintain its value but allowing
money to tighten. They inevitably choose to “print” more money. This is additionally bearish for the currency.
As mentioned, currency declines are typically acceptable to governments because a weaker currency is
stimulative for growth and helps to negate deflationary pressures. Additionally, when deflation is a problem,
currency devaluations are desirable because they help to negate it.
Debtor, current account deficit countries are especially vulnerable to capital withdrawals and currency weakness
as foreign investors also tend to flee due to both currency weakness and an environment inhospitable to good
returns on capital. However, this is less true for countries that have a great amount of debt denominated in their
own currencies (like the United States in the recent period and in the Great Depression) as these debts create a
demand for these currencies. Since debt is a promise to deliver money that one doesn’t have, this is essentially a
short squeeze which ends when a) the shorts are fully squeezed (i.e., the debts are defaulted on) and/or b)
7

The extent to which wealth taxes can be applied varies by country. For example, they have been judged to be unconstitutional in the U.S.
but have been allowed in other countries.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

16

enough money is created to alleviate the squeeze, and/or c) the debt service requirements are reduced in some
other way (e.g., forbearance).
The risk at this stage of the process is that the currency weakness and the increased supply of money will lead to
short-term credit (even government short-term credit) becoming undesirable, causing the buying of inflation
hedge assets and capital flight rather than credit creation. For foreign investors, receiving an interest rate that is
near 0% and having the foreign currency that their deposits are denominated in decline produces a negative
return; so this set of circumstances makes holding credit, even government short-term credit, undesirable.
Similarly, for domestic investors, this set of circumstances makes foreign currency deposits more desirable. If
and when this happens, investors accelerate their selling of financial assets, especially debt assets, to get cash in
order to use this cash to buy other currencies or inflation hedge assets such as gold. They also seek to borrow
cash in that local currency. Once again, that puts the central bank in the position of having to choose between
increasing the supply of money to accommodate this demand for it or allowing money and credit to tighten and
real interest rates to rise. At such times, sometimes governments seek to curtail this movement by establishing
foreign exchange controls and/or prohibiting gold ownership. Also, sometimes price and wage controls are put
into place. Such moves typically create economic distortions rather than alleviate problems.
Though the deleveraging process, especially the depression phase of it, seems horrible and certainly produces
great hardships – in some cases, even wars – it is the free market’s way of repairing itself. In other words, it gets
the capital markets and the economy into a much healthier condition by rectifying the fundamental imbalance.
Debts are reduced (through bankruptcies and other forms of debt restructuring), businesses’ break-even levels
are reduced through cost-cutting, the pricing of financial assets becomes cheap, and the supply of money to buy
the assets and to service debts is increased by the central banks – so capital formation becomes viable again.
Deleveragings typically end via a mix of 1) debt reduction, 2) austerity, 3) redistributions of wealth, and 4) debt
monetization. Additionally, through this process, businesses lowering their break-even levels through costcutting, substantial increases in risk and liquidity premiums that restore the economics of capital formation (i.e.,
lending and equity investing), and nominal interest rates being held under nominal growth rates typically occur.
The decline in economic and credit creation activity (the depression phase) is typically fast, lasting two to three
years. However, the subsequent recovery in economic activity and capital formation tends to be slow, so it takes
roughly a decade (hence the term “lost decade”) for real economic activity to reach its former peak level.
Though it takes about a decade to return the economy to its former peak levels, it typically takes longer for real
stock prices to reach former highs, because equity risk premiums take a very long time to reach pre-deleveraging
lows. During this time nominal interest rates must be kept below nominal growth rates to reduce the debt
burdens. If interest rates are at 0% and there is deflation, central banks must “print” enough money to raise
nominal growth.
As mentioned, these cycles are due to human nature and the way the system works. Throughout this process,
most everyone behaves pretty much as you’d expect in pursuing their self-interest, thus reacting to and causing
developments in logical ways, given how the economic machine works.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

17

3) The Short-Term Debt Cycle
The short-term debt cycle, also known as the business cycle, is primarily controlled by central banks’ policies
that a) tighten when inflation is too high and/or rising uncomfortably because there isn’t much slack in the
economy (as reflected in the GDP gap, capacity utilization and the unemployment rate) and credit growth is
strong; and b) ease when the reverse conditions exist. The cycles in the U.S. since 1960 are shown below.
USA GDP Gap
6%
4%
2%
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%
-8%
60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

00

05

10

These cycles can be described a bit differently by different people, but they are all about the same. They
typically occur in six phases – four in the expansion and two in the recession.
The expansion phase of the cycle:
The “early-cycle” (which typically lasts about five or six quarters), typically begins with the demand for
interest rate sensitive items (e.g., housing and cars) and retail sales picking up because of low interest rates
and lots of available credit. It is also supported by prior inventory liquidations stopping and inventory
rebuilding starting. This increased demand and rising production pulls the average workweek and then
employment up. Credit growth is typically fast, economic growth is strong (i.e., in excess of 4%), inflation is
low, growth in consumption is strong, the rate of inventory accumulation is increasing, the U.S. stock market
is typically the best investment (because there is fast growth and interest rates aren’t rising because
inflation isn’t rising) and inflation hedge assets and commodities are the worst-performing assets.
This is typically followed by what I call the “mid-cycle” (which lasts an average of three or four quarters)
when economic growth slows substantially (i.e., to around 2%), inflation remains low, growth in
consumption slows, the rate of inventory accumulation declines, interest rates dip, the stock market rate of
increase tapers off, and the rate of decline in inflation hedge assets slows.
This in turn is followed by the “late-cycle” (which typically begins about 2 ½ years into expansion, depending
on how much slack existed in the economy at the last recession’s trough). At this point, economic growth
picks up to a moderate pace (i.e., around 3.5-4%), capacity constraints emerge, but credit and demand
growth are still strong. So, inflation begins to trend higher, growth in consumption rises, inventories typically
pick up, interest rates rise, the stock market stages its last advance and inflation hedge assets become the
best-performing investments.
This is typically followed by the tightening phase of the expansion. In this phase actual or anticipated
acceleration of inflation prompts the Fed to turn restrictive, which shows up in reduced liquidity, interest
rates rising and the yield curve flattening or inverting. This in turn causes money supply and credit growth to
fall and the stock market to decline before the economy turns down.
The recession phase of the cycle follows and occurs in two parts.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

18

In the early part of the recession, the economy contracts, slack returns (as measured by the GDP gap,
capacity utilization and the unemployment rate), stocks, commodities and inflation hedge assets fall and
inflation declines because the Fed remains tight.
In the late part of the recession, the central bank eases monetary policy as inflation concerns subside and
recession concerns grow. So interest rates decline and the lower interest rates cause stock prices to rise
(even though the economy hasn’t yet turned up) while commodity prices and inflation hedge assets
continue to be weak. The lower interest rates and higher stock prices set the stage for the expansion part of
the cycle to begin.
Although I have referred to average time lags between each of these stages of the cycle, as mentioned from the
outset, it is the sequence of events, not the specific timeline, which is important to keep an eye on. For example,
given the previously described linkages, inflation doesn't normally heat up until the slack in the economy is
largely eliminated, and the Fed doesn't normally turn restrictive until inflation rises. An expansion that starts off
after a deep recession (i.e., one that produces lots of slack) is bound to last longer than an expansion that begins
with less excess capacity. Similarly, as the cycle progresses through its various stages as a function of the
sequences just described, the rate at which it progresses will be a function of the forcefulness of the influences
which drive its progression. For example, an expansion that is accompanied by an aggressively stimulative
central bank is likely to be stronger and evolve more quickly than one that is accompanied by a less stimulative
monetary policy. Also, exogenous influences such as China’s entry into the world economy, wars and natural
disasters can alter the progressions of these cycles. What I am providing is a description of the classic template:
not all are manifest precisely as described.
For sake of brevity, we won’t go into great depth about business cycles here.

The Interaction of These Three Forces
While the economy is more complicated than this template suggests, laying the business cycle on top of the
“long wave” cycle and then laying them both on top of the trend per capita GDP growth line gives a reasonably
good roadmap for understanding the capitalist system and seeing both where we are now and where we are
probably headed. For the sake of brevity, we won’t digress into a complete explanation of this. But we will give
an example.
Example: The table below shows each of the cyclical peaks and troughs in the fed funds rate, when they
occurred, the magnitudes of changes up and the magnitudes of the changes down (in both basis point terms and
percentage terms), since 1919. These are the interest rate changes that caused all of the recessions and
expansions over the last 90 years. This table shows 15 cyclical increases and 15 cyclical decreases. Note that
these swings were around one big uptrend and one big downtrend. Specifically, note that from the September
1932 low (at 0%) until the May 1981 high (at 19%), every cyclical low in interest rates was above the prior
cyclical low and every cyclical high was above the prior cyclical high – i.e., all of the cyclical increases and
decreases were around that 50-year uptrend. And note that from the May 1981 high in the fed funds rate (at
19%), until the March 2009 low in the fed funds rate (0%), every cyclical low in the fed funds rate was lower
than the prior low and every cyclical high in interest rates was below the prior cyclical high – i.e., all of the cyclical
increases and all of the cyclical decreases were around a 27-year down trend. Each cyclical decline in interest
rates incrementally reduced debt service payments, lowered the de-facto purchase prices of items bought on
credit to make them more affordable and boosted the value of assets a notch (having a positive wealth effect).
So, debt continued to rise relative to income and money, though the trend in debt service payments was
essentially flat, until interest rates hit 0% and this could not longer continue, at which time the government had
to print and spend a lot of money to make up for the reduced private sector credit creation and spending.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

19

Fed Funds Rates1
Low

Date

Nominal Change

Period

% Change

High

Date

5.88%

Dec-20

4.80%

Nov-29

2.1%

Aug-53

3.59%

Oct-57

4.57%

Dec-59

5.59%

Sep-66

8.08%

Dec-69

11.00%

Jun-74

16.50%

Mar-80

19.00%

May-81

11.44%

Aug-84

9.75%

May-89

6.50%

Dec-00

5.25%

Aug-07

(in months)
3.96%

Oct-19

1.92%

Jul-24

0.0%

Sep-32

0.65%

Jun-54

0.88%

Jun-58

2.27%

Jul-61

3.33%

Jun-67

4.00%

4.75%

11.00%

8.00%

Feb-72

Dec-76

Aug-80

Nov-82

5.88%

Oct-86

3.00%

Sep-92

1.00%

0 - 0.25%

Jun-03

1.92%

14

49%

-3.96%

43

-67%

2.88%

64

150%

-4.80%

34

-100%

2.09%

251

#N/A

-1.44%

10

-69%

2.94%

40

452%

-2.71%

8

-75%

3.69%

18

419%

-2.30%

19

-50%

3.32%

62

146%

-2.26%

9

-40%

4.75%

30

143%

-4.08%

26

-50%

7.00%

28

175%

-6.25%

30

-57%

11.75%

39

247%

-5.50%

5

-33%

8.00%

9

73%

-11.00%

18

-58%

3.44%

21

43%

-5.56%

26

-49%

3.87%

31

66%

-6.75%

40

-69%

3.50%

99

117%

-5.50%

30

-85%

4.25%

50

425%

-3.00%

13

-57%

Current

(1) Prior to 1975, T-Bill used as proxy for Fed Funds target rate
Avg Increases
Range of Increases
Avg Decreases
Range of Decreases

4.53%

54

1.9% to 11.8%

9 to 251

-4.65%

22

-11.0% to -1.4%

5 to 43

Again, for sake of brevity, we won’t go into greater depth about the three forces' interactions here. As mentioned
at the outset, I wrote this paper just to give you my simple-minded explanation of how I believe the economic
machine works at a fundamental level so that you can assess it for yourself. However, those who are inclined to
learn more about how the deleveraging process and long term cycles work should refer to my papers: “An InDepth Look at Deleveragings” and “Why Countries Succeed and Fail Economically”.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

20

Important Disclosures
Information contained herein is only current as of the printing date and is intended only to provide the observations and views of Bridgewater
Associates, L.P. (“Bridgewater”) as of the date of writing without regard to the date on which the recipient may receive or access the
information. Bridgewater has no obligation to provide recipients hereof with updates or changes to the information contained herein.
Performance and markets may be higher or lower than what is shown herein and the information, assumptions and analysis that may be time
sensitive in nature may have changed materially and may no longer represent the views of Bridgewater. Statements containing forwardlooking views or expectations (or comparable language) are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties and are informational in nature.
Actual performance could, and may have, differed materially from the information presented herein. Past performance is not indicative of
future results.
HYPOTHETICAL OR SIMULATED PERFORMANCE RESULTS HAVE CERTAIN INHERENT LIMITATIONS. UNLIKE AN ACTUAL
PERFORMANCE RECORD, SIMULATED RESULTS DO NOT REPRESENT ACTUAL TRADING OR THE COSTS OF MANAGING THE
PORTFOLIO. ALSO, SINCE THE TRADES HAVE NOT ACTUALLY BEEN EXECUTED, THE RESULTS MAY HAVE UNDER OR OVER
COMPENSATED FOR THE IMPACT, IF ANY, OF CERTAIN MARKET FACTORS, SUCH AS LACK OF LIQUIDITY. SIMULATED TRADING
PROGRAMS IN GENERAL ARE ALSO SUBJECT TO THE FACT THAT THEY ARE DESIGNED WITH THE BENEFIT OF HINDSIGHT. NO
REPRESENTATION IS BEING MADE THAT ANY ACCOUNT WILL OR IS LIKELY TO ACHIEVE PROFITS OR LOSSES SIMILAR TO THOSE
SHOWN.
Bridgewater research utilizes (in whole and in part) data and information from public, private, and internal sources. Some internally
generated information, such as internally constructed market series, may be considered theoretical in nature and subject to inherent
limitations associated therein, including but not limited to, an ability to find appropriate inputs. External sources include International Energy
Agency, Investment Management Association, International Monetary Fund, National Bureau of Economic Research, Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, United Nations, US Department of Commerce, World Bureau of Metal Statistics, World Economic
Forum, as well as information companies such as BBA Libor Limited, Bloomberg Finance L.P., CEIC Data Company Ltd., Consensus Economics
Inc., Credit Market Analysis Ltd., Ecoanalitica, Emerging Portfolio Fund Research, Inc., Global Financial Data, Inc., Global Trade Information
Services, Inc., Markit Economics Limited, Mergent, Inc., Moody’s Analytics, Inc., MSCI, RealtyTrac, Inc., RP Data Ltd., SNL Financial LC,
Standard and Poor’s, Thomson Reuters, TrimTabs Investment Research, Inc. and Wood Mackenzie Limited. While we consider information
from external sources to be reliable, we do not independently verify information obtained from external sources and we make no
representation or warranty as to the accuracy, completeness or reliability of such information.
The views expressed herein are solely those of Bridgewater and are subject to change without notice. You should assume that Bridgewater
has a significant financial interest in one or more of the positions and/or securities or derivatives discussed. Bridgewater’s employees may
have long or short positions in and buy or sell securities or derivatives referred to in this material. Those responsible for preparing this
material receive compensation based upon various factors, including, among other things, the quality of their work and firm revenues.
This material is for informational and educational purposes only and is not an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy the securities or
other instruments mentioned. Any such offering will be made pursuant to a definitive offering memorandum. This material does not
constitute a personal recommendation or take into account the particular investment objectives, financial situations, or needs of individual
investors which are necessary considerations before making any investment decision. Investors should consider whether any advice or
recommendation in this research is suitable for their particular circumstances and, where appropriate, seek professional advice, including
legal, tax, accounting, investment or other advice.
The information provided herein is not intended to provide a sufficient basis on which to make an investment decision and investment
decisions should not be based on simulated, hypothetical or illustrative information that have inherent limitations. Unlike an actual
performance record, simulated or hypothetical results do not represent actual trading or the actual costs of management and may have
under or over compensated for the impact of certain market risk factors. Bridgewater makes no representation that any account will or is
likely to achieve returns similar to those shown. The price and value of the investments referred to in this research and the income therefrom
may fluctuate.
Every investment involves risk and in volatile or uncertain market conditions, significant variations in the value or return on that investment
may occur. Investments in hedge funds are complex, speculative and carry a high degree of risk, including the risk of a complete loss of an
investor’s entire investment. Past performance is not a guide to future performance, future returns are not guaranteed, and a complete loss of
original capital may occur. Certain transactions, including those involving leverage, futures, options, and other derivatives, give rise to
substantial risk and are not suitable for all investors. Fluctuations in exchange rates could have material adverse effects on the value or price
of, or income derived from, certain investments.
This information is not directed at or intended for distribution to or use by any person or entity located in any jurisdiction where such
distribution, publication, availability or use would be contrary to applicable law or regulation or which would subject Bridgewater to any
registration or licensing requirements within such jurisdiction.
No part of this material may be (i) copied, photocopied or duplicated in any form by any means or (ii) redistributed without the prior written
consent of Bridgewater ® Associates, LP.

© 2012 Bridgewater Associates, LP

21

